# Chapter 0: Introduction

## 0.2 - Introduction to programming languages

The process of creating a program is called **programming**.

The collection of physical computer parts that make up a computer and execute programs is called the **hardware**.

### Machine Language

The limited set of instructions that a CPU can understand directly is called **machine code** (or **machine language** or an **instruction set**).

The number of bits that make up a single command vary — For example, some CPUs process instructions that are always 32 bits long, whereas some other CPUs (such as the x86 family, which you are likely using) have instructions that can be a variable length.

### Assembly Language

**Assembly language** was invented to help humans read and understand machine language.

The CPU cannot understand assembly language directly. The assembly program must be translated into machine language before it can be executed by the computer. This is done by using a program called an **assembler**.

Programs written in assembly tend to be very fast, and assembly is still used today when speed is critical.

Downsides include assembly language not being very portable — a program written in assembly for one CPU will likely not work on hardware that uses a different instruction set, and would have to be rewritten or extensively modified.

### High-level Languages

To address the readability and portability concerns, new programming languages such as C, C++, Pascal (and later, languages such as Java, Javascript, and Perl) were developed. These languages are called **hgih level languages**, as they are designed to allow the programmer to write programs without having to be as concerned about what kind of computer the program will be run on.

Like assembly programs, high-level language programs must also be translated into a format the computer can understand before they can be run. There are two primary ways to do this: **compiling** and **interpreting**.

A **compiler** is a program that reads source code and produces a stand-alone executable program that can then be run.

Once it is an executable, it does not need to be compiled to be able to run the program.

Compilers today are very good at producing optimized code very quickly.

The executable program then is run on the hardware. The hardware produces the program results.

An **interpreter** is a program that directly executes the instructions in the source code without requiring them to be compiled into an executable first.

Interpreters are more flexible than compilers but are less efficient when running programs because the interpreting process needs to be done every time the program is run. **This means the interpreter is needed every time the program is run**.

Interpreter work-flow: *High-level language code* gets interpreted by the *Interpreter*. It then gets run on the *hardware*. Finally, the *hardware* produces the program results.

Most languages can be compiled or interpreted, however, traditionally languages like C, C++, and Pascal are compiled, whereas "scripting languages" like Perl and JavaScript tend to be interpreted. Some languages, like Java, use a mix of the two.

**Benefits to compiling**: 

- programs can be compiled (or interpreted) for many different systems, and you don't have to change the program to run on different CPUs (you just recompile for that CPU).

**Two general exceptions to portability**:

- many operating systems, such as Microsoft Windows, contain platform-specific functions that you can use in your code. These can make it much easier to write a program for a specific operating system, but at the expense of portability.
- Some compilers also support compiler-specific extensions — if you use these, your programs won't be able to be compiled by other compilers that don't support the same extensions without modification.

### Rules, Best Practices, and Warnings

**Rule**:

- instructions that you **_must_** do, as required by the language. Failure to abide by a rule will generally result in your program not working.

**Best Practice**:

- things that you **_should_** do, because that way of doing things is generally considered a standard or highly recommended. That is, either everybody does it that way (and if you do otherwise, you'll be doing something people don't expect), or it is superior to the alternatives.

**Warning**:

- things that you **_should not_** do, because they will generally lead to unexpected results.