# Chapter 0: Introduction

## 0.3 - Introduction to C/C++

### Before C++, there was C

The C language was developed in 1972 by Dennis Ritchie at Bell Telephone laboratories, primarily as a systems programming language (a language to write operating systems with).

C ended up being so efficient and flexible that in 1973, Ritchie and Ken Thompson rewrote most of the UNIX operating system using C.

In 1978, Brian Kernighan and Dennis Ritchie published an informal specification for the C language called "The C Programming Language."

In 1983, the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) formed a committee to establish a formal standard for C. 

In 1989, they released the C89 standard, or more commonly known as ANSI C.

In 1990, the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) adopted ANSI C (with a few minor modifications). This version became known as C90.

Compilers eventually became ANSI C/C90 compliant, and programs desiring maximum portability were coded to this standard.

In 1999, the ANSI committee released a new version of C called C99. C99 adopted many features which had already made their way into compilers as extensions, or had been implemented in C++.

### C++

In 1979, C++ was developed by Bjarne Stroustrup at Bell Labs as an extension to C.

C++ adds many features to the C language and is thought to be a superset of C, though it is not strictly true (as C99 introduced a few features that do not exist in C++). 

C++ became popular mainly due to the fact that it is an object-oriented language.

In 1998, C++ was ratified by the ISO committee, and again in 2003 (called C++03).

Three major updates to the C++ language including added functionality to the language:

- In 2011, C++11
- In 2014, C++14
- In 2017, C++17

C++11 added a huge number of new capabilities to the language.

### C and C++'s Philosophy

**The underlying design philosophy of C and C++ can be summed up as "trust the programmer"**.

C++ is designed to allow the programmer a hgih degree of freedom to do what they want.

However, this also means the language often won't stop you from doing things that don't make sense, because it will assume you're doing so for some reason it doesn't understand.

There are quite a few pitfalls that new programmers are likely to fall into if caught unaware.

**_This is one of the primary reasons why knowing what you shouldn't do in C/C++ is almost as important as knowing what you should do_**.

#### Q: What is C++ good at?

- C++ excels in situations where high performance and precise control over memory and other resources is needed. Here are a few common types of applications that most likely would be written in C++:
  - Video games
  - Real-time systems (e.g. for transportation, manufacturing, etc...)
  - High-performance financial applications (e.g. high frequency trading)
  - Graphical applications and simulations
  - Productivity / office applications
  - Embedded software
  - Audio and video processing

#### Q: Do I need to know C before I do these tutorials?

No. Once you know C++, it should be pretty easy to learn standard C if you ever have the need. These days, C is mostly used for niche use cases: code that runs on embedded devices, when you need to interact with other languages that can only interface with C, etc… For most other cases, C++ is recommended.